Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
Available online 18 August 2023
0952-1976/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Multimodal hate speech detection via multi-scale visual kernels and 
knowledge distillation architecture 
Anusha Chhabra , Dinesh Kumar Vishwakarma
* 
Biometric Research Laboratory, Department of Information Technology, Delhi Technological University, Delhi, 110042, India   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Hate content 
Deep learning 
Machine learning 
Multimodal 
Adaptive receptive field 
ABSTRACT  
People increasingly use social media platforms to express themselves by posting visuals and texts. As a result, 
hate content is on the rise, necessitating practical visual caption analysis. Thus, the relationship between image 
and caption modalities is crucial in visual caption analysis. Contrarily, most methods combine features from the 
image and caption modalities using deep learning architectures with millions of parameters already trained 
without integrating a specialized attention module, resulting in less desirable outcomes. This paper suggests a 
novel multi-modal architecture for identifying hateful memetic information in response to the above observation. 
The proposed architecture contains a novel "multi-scale kernel attentive visual" (MSKAV) module that uses an 
efficient multi-branch structure to extract discriminative visual features. Additionally, MSKAV utilizes an 
adaptive receptive field using multi-scale kernels. MSKAV also incorporates a multi-directional visual attention 
module to highlight spatial regions of importance. The proposed model also contains a novel "knowledge 
distillation-based attentional caption" (KDAC) module. It uses a transformer-based self-attentive block to extract 
discriminative features from meme captions. Thorough experimentation on multi-modal hate speech benchmarks 
MultiOff, Hateful Memes, and MMHS150K datasets achieved accuracy scores of 0.6250, 0.8750, and 0.8078, 
respectively. It also reaches impressive AUC scores of 0.6557, 0.8363, and 0.7665 on the three datasets, 
respectively, beating SOTA multi-modal hate speech identification models.   
1. Introduction 
A meme is " a behavior passed on from one person to another through 
mimicry or other non-genetic behaviors." Memes can be found in a va -
riety of forms, such as photographs, videos, and Twitter postings, among 
others, and they have a growing influence on social media communi -
cation (( French, 2017 ), ( Suryawanshi et al., 2020a )). Memes, text-based 
visuals, are the most common type of material that is typically funny and 
often intended to be humorous and harmless. But, various categories of 
images, texts, or a combination of the two could turn into a hateful 
meme. Since the pictures have several modalities (caption and pictorial 
nature), it is usually challenging to make sense of the content from just 
one modality ( He et al., 2016 ). Therefore, it ’ s crucial to consider both 
modalities to comprehend the meme ’ s meaning or intended meaning. 
Unfortunately, memes are to blame for spreading hatred throughout 
society; consequently, it is essential to identify memes that contain 
hateful content automatically. However, because memes commonly 
incorporate text and images, controlling them through automated 
evaluation is challenging. On the other hand, the facts such as the power 
supply process ( Yu et al., 2023a ), which remain the cellphones charge 
for a very long time, the reasonable costs of smartphones, and the 
availability of the tools providing the option to look into the insights, 
give the ease of access to the users, creating a tremendous amount of 
data on the web. As a result, social media contains both explicit and 
implicit forms of insulting or abusive content (( Waseem et al., 2017 ), 
( Watanabe et al., 2018 ), ( Rani et al., 2020 )). It may be categorized as 
explicitly offensive or hateful if it is identified as such. Imprecise lan -
guage, sarcasm, an absence in expression, negative terminology, or 
various forms of communication frequently conceals the true meaning of 
implicit hate content. By being harsh or insulting, hate content seeks to 
upset or humiliate its target audience ( Chhabra and Vishwakarma, 
2023 ). Previous research on online content recognition concentrated on 
trolling ( De La Vega and Ng, 2019 ), aggressiveness detection ( Aroyehun 
and Gelbukh, 2018 ), hate speech detection (( Schmidt and Wiegand, 
2017 ), ( Ranjan et al., 2016 )), diacritics ( Le-hong, 2021 ), cyberbullying 
( Arroyo-Fern ´andez et al., 2018 ), and cyber terrorists ( Saidi et al., 2022 ), 
emotion and sentiment analysis ( Aka Uymaz and Kumova Metin, 2022 ), 
automatic fake news detection (( Ali et al., 2023 ), ( Ali et al., 2022a )) 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: anusha.chhabra@gmail.com (A. Chhabra), dinesh@dtu.ac.in , dvishwakarma@gmail.com (D.K. Vishwakarma).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/engap pai 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106991 
Received 8 May 2023; Received in revised form 18 July 2023; Accepted 12 August 2023   

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
2
( Gandhi et al., 2020 ). conducted studies to identify objectionable con -
tent in photos, including nudity, sexually explicit material, objects that 
encourage violence, and racially insensitive material. Due to the wide 
range of language and concepts used in literature for hate content, the 
SemEval 2020 work divided the text into three categories: determined, 
undetermined, and, if determined, directed to a set of people or an in -
dividual ( Zampieri et al., 2020 ). In light of this, when an idea or feeling 
is spread over a medium to deteriorate the social identity of a target 
person, group, or community, it is what we call a hateful meme. Since a 
meme pairs a neutral sentence with a provocative visual or vice versa, it 
might be considered implicitly harmful. Therefore, building a system for 
offensive content detection on social media platforms is essential. 
The first example from Fig. 1 depicts the caption as non-hate while 
the image and caption depict a hate message combined. The second 
illustration demonstrates how the meme disparages a minority by 
attacking religion. This is clear from the indications seen in the photo -
graph, specifically the clothing worn by the figures. The third example is 
insulting Hillary (the Democratic candidate for president in the 2016 U. 
S. election) supporters by humiliating them, and the last example amply 
demonstrates hatred towards a particular faith by expelling individuals 
forcibly from the United States of America. 
1.1. Motivation 
Recently, more users are actively participating on social media in the 
form of WhatsApp posts, Facebook updates, YouTube videos, reviews, 
and comments, among other forms, on various themes. People are 
sharing their opinions, which has resulted in a vast volume of data on -
line. The information needs to be examined for future study. The data 
from the last five years has been considered for visualization and 
motivation behind conducting this research. Fig. 2 illustrates the count 
of hate content publications from Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus 
databases. From Fig. 2 , it is observed that there is a tremendous amount 
of hate content generation on social media, giving the motivation to 
conduct research in this field. 
Moreover, the publications on multimodal hate speech detection are 
very few. If we take the data from WoS and Scopus databases, the 
number of publications via keyword search as "multimodal hate speech" 
is 1% and 6.6%, respectively. Nowadays, people communicate via 
memes more often than texts, emphasizing authors ’ focus on multi -
modal data. 
1.2. Challenges 
Different categories of images, texts, or combining two could create 
various memes. It can be a benign text confounder, benign image 
confounder, contrapositive, or counterfactual meme (refer to Fig. 3 ). 
Fig. 3 (a) stands for misleading memes. The left image depicts a hateful 
meme, whereas the other two illustrate its confounders, changing its 
label and resulting in a not-hateful meme. The confounding meme can 
be generated by changing the original meme ’ s image or label. Fig. 3 (b) 
depicts contrapositive, and Fig. 3 (c) represents counterfactual meme. 
The challenge lies in the diversities of these types of memes which can 
contain objects that the existing classifiers cannot identify the result. 
The solution is essential via incorporating additional information from 
different sources to improve classification accuracy. An optical char -
acter recognition (OCR) technique can be applied to extract the lin -
guistic part of the meme, and object detection methods can be utilized to 
encode the correlated image part of the meme. Aspects of several mo -
dalities have been combined at three levels in prior research to solve this 
issue: early fusion, late fusion, and hybrid fusion. Late fusion takes place 
at the decision or score level; early fusion happens. 
at the feature level, and hybrid fusion mixes the two. One of the most 
important research issues is combining text and visual modalities ( Poria 
et al., 2018 ). asserts that examining a post ’ s multimodal content yields 
better outcomes than processing it separately. In feature-level fusion, 
the features gathered independently for each modality are fused and 
input into the classification model ( Poria et al., 2017 ). A late fusion 
technique, on the other hand, is when the characteristics obtained for 
each data mode are provided to several classification models, after 
which the overall scores of numerous models are combined [ ( Poria 
et al., 2016 ), ( Niu et al., 2016 )]. Early fusion may not accurately capture 
the tightly coupled correlation among the pertinent modalities, and 
decision-level fusion may not accurately portray the interplay between 
several modalities. To address this problem, attention-based interme -
diate fusion models were created [ ( Huang et al., 2019 ), ( Ma et al., 
2021 )]. The proposed approach has significant difficulty sustaining the 
validity of meaning while bridging the relationship between modalities. 
Although early and late fusion is one of the primary methods for con -
necting various modalities meaningfully, it does not appear straight -
forward. A study ( Poria et al., 2015 ) found that late fusion outperforms 
early fusion in integrating text, audio, and facial expression features. We 
created a feature-level fusion in this research to merge the simultaneous 
Fig. 1. Examples of hateful memes.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
3
functionalities of the image and text modalities. These are the three 
main components of the model that we provided. There are three of 
these: (a) an attentional tokenizer branch for retrieving relevant 
text-related characteristics from the labels; (b) a multi-scale visual 
attentional branch for retrieving relevant visual characteristics; and (c) a 
cross-domain feature fusion structure for combining multi-modal data 
and carrying out classification. The task we performed is a binary clas -
sification of a meme as hate or no hate. Various state-of-the-art visual 
languages (dual stream models) can be trained with correlated visual 
and textual content datasets. All the existing visual language models use 
pre-trained faster RCNN for extracting visual features and BERT for 
language modeling. Any visual hints in the image are difficult to 
recognize. Hence, the placement of text in the meme is also crucial. 
1.3. Significance 
The significance of detecting hate content from memes is rapidly 
increasing with the proliferation of the Internet and digital media plat -
forms. Hate content in various forms is also a serious concern nowadays. 
As such, professionals in technology, business strategy, government 
agencies, and political analysis have emphasized the importance of 
leveraging this domain in various facets of the decision-making process 
to enhance reputations by developing advanced deep learning archi -
tectures for hate content identification. This study may be significant to 
individuals who frequently utilize established cutting-edge deep 
learning architectures for recognizing hate content. This will encourage 
future researchers to focus on the widespread multimodal hate content, 
as very few studies have been found on multimodal hate content. 
Although, textual hate content approaches have proven effective 
because multi-branch techniques ( Yadav and Kumar Vishwakarma, 
2023 ) aim to extract complementary features from different domains. 
Most multi-branch methods are based on implicit assumptions that 
multi-domain characteristics will be combined evenly. One part might 
be more significant than another; therefore, this might not always be the 
case. This is the primary or fundamental notion that guided the design of 
the suggested architecture. The proposed architecture ’ s strength is its 
ability to adaptively change the ratio of fusion of visual and textual 
features, thereby improving model performance. The attentional process 
has also drawn attention to specific components in both branches. Re -
sults from experiments validate the suggested model. 
The followings are the work ’ s primary contributions:  
• We presented a novel twofold branch architecture named multi-scale 
kernels for visuals and a knowledge distillation-based model for 
texts. A novel multi-branch attentional module is introduced to 
collect pertinent data using visual modality, and a branch of the 
attentional tokenizer for the caption modality is created to extract 
prominent features.  
• The novel "multi-scale kernel attentive visual" (MSKAV) module uses 
an efficient multi-branch structure to extract discriminative visual 
features from memes. MSKAV contains multi-scale kernels to have 
receptive fields of multiple resolutions. Additionally, MSKAV in -
corporates multi-directional visual attention to highlight spatial re -
gions of importance.  
• The proposed "knowledge distillation-based attentional caption" 
(KDAC) module has self-attention-based transformer architecture for 
efficient sequence learning from meme text.  
• We conduct in-depth analysis and experiments using three multi- 
modal hate speech benchmarks MultiOff ( Suryawanshi et al., 
2020b ), Hateful Memes ( Kiela et al., 2021 ), and MMHS150K ( Gomez 
et al., 2020 ) datasets, beating the existing state-of-the-art. The 
ablation study on (( Suryawanshi et al., 2020b ), ( Kiela et al., 2021 ), 
Fig. 2. Depicts the number of publications in hate content identification over the last five years taken from (a) Web of Science and (b) Scopus database.  
Fig. 3. (a) Samples of Text and Image confounders. Left Image of (a) shows a hateful meme. In contrast, the middle and right images of (a) illustrate its confounders 
via changing text or image to a non-hateful meme, (b) represents a contrapositive meme, and (c) depicts a counterfactual meme. 
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
4
(Gomez et al., 2020)) is carried out by considering the evaluation on 
KDAC (text branch only), MSKAV w/o attention, and MSKAV with 
attention, which proves that the proposed multimodal architecture is 
giving the best results. 
The subsequent sections of this paper are structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes the related research in this field, considering textual, 
visual, and multimodal aspects. Section 3 will detail the proposed work 
and the methodologies used for prediction, followed by the experi -
mental setup, including hardware requirements and hyper-parameter 
specifications in section 4. The result analysis to highlight the spatial 
region of importance, ablation trials, and generalization study are 
covered in section 5. Section 6 covers the discussion part. At last, the 
study concludes with more suggestions for future research covered in 
section 7. 
2. Related work 
This section reviews the literature review of work done in detecting 
hate speech considering textual, visual, and multimodal aspects. 
2.1. Textual aspect 
The natural language processing (NLP) branch is working to close the 
comprehension and understanding gap between human languages and 
computers. Specifically, the efficiency and effectiveness of deep learning 
architectures have made extensive advancement in the areas like 
sentiment analysis (Pandey and Vishwakarma, 2023), atomistic simu -
lation (Martín and Camacho, 2022), self-monitoring systems, object 
detection, life prediction analysis, online education like music teaching 
(Yu et al., 2023b), classification, filtering, language translation, etc., 
covering diverse languages. With the ease of social media and the vast 
use English language, hate speech is also flowing on the web in various 
regional languages like Urdu, Portuguese, Bengali, Hindi, etc. 
Hindi-English code-switched language models for efficient text repre -
sentation are encountered by (Sharma et al., 2022). The study (Ali et al., 
2023) concentrates on brief sentences since learning-sufficient qualities 
in news information are lacking. More research is needed to find the 
augmented features using a web search for longer material. The lengthy 
text may be divided into shorter sentences to acquire probabilistic 
pre-decision. By combining the outcomes of the pre-decision, the final 
decision regarding the class can be deduced (Ali et al., 2022a). illustrates 
that traditional features collected from news articles outperform previ -
ous models built using text embedding approaches. Most online publi -
cations in this field are available in a single modality, i.e., Text only, and 
most of the work has been done in English only (Chhabra and Vishwa -
karma, 2023). Traditional machine learning algorithms rely on feature 
engineering, making the process complex and time-consuming (Chhabra 
and Kumar, 2023). The performance analysis is measured in (Chhabra 
and Vishwakarma, 2022) using various traditional learning, deep 
learning, and fuzzy logic classifiers for hate speech detection, showing 
the outstanding performance of fuzzy classifiers. In hate content iden -
tification, the Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier includes manu -
ally extracted text features to determine whether the provided content is 
abusive (Warner and Hirschberg, 2012). N-gram characteristics were 
employed by (Djuric et al., 2015) to categorize whether or not the 
speech was abusive (Djuric et al., 2015). have classified whether the 
speech is abusive using n-gram features. There are many text-based 
datasets available for hostility recognizable proof (Watanabe et al., 
2018), the recognition of hate speech (Davidson et al., 2017), and the 
identification of offensive language (Zampieri et al., 2020). The rele -
vancy of cross-dataset and cross-lingual generalization in this area is 
remarked by (Fortuna et al., 2021) and (Shi et al., 2022). Authors in 
(Watanabe et al., 2018) work on unigrams and examples of the text for 
recognizing hate content. After being meticulously crafted by hand, 
these patterns are given to machine learning models for further 
classification (Zampieri et al., 2020). address some of the difficulties in 
identifying offensive content and the classification of hateful tweets in 
German. This research emphasizes features specific to a single modality, 
such as text and manual feature extraction. Nowadays, the advancement 
in NLP has introduced pre-trained linguistic models like BERT (Devlin 
et al., 2019), and its variants like RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), DistilBERT 
(Sanh et al., 2019), and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) are widely used in hate 
content classification. BERT uses large amounts of unlabeled data to 
build models with adjustable parameters as needed for smaller amounts 
of supervised data to enhance performance (Ali et al., 2022b). The 
variants of BERT are assessed for hate content classification incorpo -
rating characters with subword embedding (Wullach et al., 2022). Au -
thors in (Rajput et al., 2021) designed a framework for detecting hate 
content by combining DNNs with static BERT embedding to extract 
contextual information better. 
2.2. Visual aspect 
Due to the tremendous data increase in various modalities, deep 
learning models are used. We work with memes spanning text and im -
ages, and deep learning algorithms automatically extract features from 
these memes. The research till now majorly relies on object detection 
where only images are considered (Suryawanshi et al., 2020b). CNN is 
frequently employed in machine vision tasks as it provides the benefit of 
processing pixels in images (Zhang et al., 2023a). It has also been 
acknowledged that error gradients in deep networks or recurrent neural 
networks can build and result in very large gradients during the training 
phase. Furthermore, the benefits of successfully avoiding gradient ex -
plosion are investigated using a bidirectional long- and short-term 
memory (Bi-LSTM) neural network fed with the CNN characteristics 
(Zhang et al., 2023b). In image-based hate content detection, Convo -
lution Neural Networks (CNNs) models are the most prominent in 
identifying offensive content in the form of nudity ((Arentz and Olstad, 
2004), (Kakumanu et al., 2007), (Tian et al., 2018)), appropriate or 
in-appropriate images for children (Gandhi et al., 2020), 
offensive/non-compliant logos (Gandhi et al., 2020), pornographic web 
pages (Hu et al., 2007). 
2.3. Multimodal aspect 
The related work till now focuses on unimodal aspects, i.e., either 
text or image individually. Now a day, Information in the form of 
internet memes is the most common on social media platforms, and they 
form the text-accompanied images. A shared task on the analysis of 
memotion was already available in SemEval2020 (Zampieri et al., 
2020). Very few datasets are available in this aspect (Chhabra and 
Vishwakarma, 2023). The reliability and robustness of the algorithms 
should be taken into account prior to working on multimodal data (Bajaj 
and Vishwakarma, 2023). (Kiela et al., 2021) designed a popular Face -
book hateful memes challenge dataset in May 2020 and obtained a 
human accuracy score of 84.70% after the annotation process (Kiela 
et al., 2021). also applied a VilBERT (Lu et al., 2019) on conceptual 
caption (Sharma et al., 2018), providing a winning solution by claiming 
test accuracy of 69.47% and an AUC score of 75.44%. Authors in (Lee 
et al., 2021) implemented R–CNN for the visual branch and BERT for a 
textual branch on Facebook hateful memes dataset, giving an accuracy 
score of 75.80% and AUC of 82.80%. An impressive accuracy score of 
71.08% on (Kiela et al., 2021) is also claimed by (Bhat et al., 2022) using 
BERT and Xception models. A dataset of about 150K images by the name 
"MMHS150K" (Gomez et al., 2020) is the largest dataset available pub -
licly on hate speech. They tried to build a model which can differentiate 
between publications that use offensive language, and that target 
particular communities. They, therefore, experimented with utilizing 
hate scores instead of binary labels for each tweet, but the data showed 
no significant differences between the various labels of hatred in the 
experimental part. Authors in (Gomez et al., 2020) used the Feature 
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
5
concatenation model, textual kernel model, and spatial concatenation 
model to boost the performance with an accuracy of 68.50%. A dataset 
with only 743 offensive memes is also publicly available and imple -
mented stacked LSTM and VGG16 for evaluating precision, recall, and 
F-score ( Suryawanshi et al., 2020b ). ( Lee et al., 2021 ) applied R – CNN 
and BERT on the MultiOff dataset, calculating precision, recall, and 
F1-score as 64.50%, 65.10%, and 64.60% respectively. Currently, 
sarcasm is also a developing research area in relation to sentiment 
analysis, emoji detection, and hate/offensive content. Authors in 
( Chauhan et al., 2022 ) also focus primarily on sarcasm detection using a 
multimodal attention mechanism followed by emoji and sentiment 
analysis ( Pandey and Vishwakarma, 2023 ). 
All of the various approaches covered above have taken into account 
various machine learning and deep learning techniques for the predic -
tion of hate content. The preceding study demonstrates that there are 
very few publicly available datasets and papers that have been reported 
on hate memes. Consequently, this is a new field with a significant un -
solved problem. To as best as of our knowledge, no prior study has 
utilized the multi-scale kernel and multi-directional attention to obtain 
the feature-level information, which adds novelty to our proposed 
approach as mentioned in section 3 . 
3. Proposed methodology 
Most of the work is done on textual datasets ( Chhabra and Vishwa -
karma, 2023 ) using majorly baseline machine learning methods to 
evaluate the results. However, it is also observed that there is an incli -
nation towards deep learning models for text classification after the 
SemEval-2019 Task5 competition ( Baruah et al., 2019 ). In addition, 
transformers-based attention mechanisms have also shown advance -
ments in learning the contexts in a more reliable manner ( Devlin et al., 
2019 ). The proposed architecture of the paper is composed of two 
modules "Multi-Scale Kernel Attentive. 
Visual Branch" and "Knowledge Distillation based Attentional 
Caption Branch" each for images and captions respectively as shown in 
Fig. 4 . After feeding the respective inputs to their respective modules, 
the (16,16) features obtained from both branches are fused together (32 
features) before passing through the fully connected layer resulting in 
the binary classification as hate or non-hate. 
The following subsections describe the respective modules: 
3.1. Multi-scale kernel attentive visual (MSKAV) module 
This module describes the vision branch that consists of a dynamic 
selection of multi-scale convolution kernels along with multi-branch 
architecture and visual Attention. The architecture is a simple, highly 
modularized network framework for image classification. It is made by 
repeating a building block with the same topology and stronger repre -
sentations. This concept exposes a new dimension, "cardinality" as an 
essential factor along with depth and width. The visual branch archi -
tecture with cardinality 32 (total 32 paths) and 4d bottleneck width, 
which is further enhanced using selective kernel convolution followed 
by multi-directional visual attention as shown in Fig. 5 . For each path, 
Conv 1 × 1 – Selective Kernel- Conv 1 × 1 are done at each convolution 
path. Each path ’ s internal dimension is designated as d (d = 4). 
The cardinality C (C = 32) represents the number of paths. It is also 
the dimension of 128, which is further raised to 256 if we add the 
dimension of each "selective kernel" block. Then all the paths are added 
together by the concatenation operator. The fundamental principle of 
choosing a "Selective Kernel" convolution is that it is helpful in optimi -
zation by enabling each neuron to adaptively change the size of its 
receptive fields (RF) based on various scales of input data. A detailed 
explanation of "Selective Kernel" is given in section 3.1.2, and a multi- 
directional visual attention module is described in section 3.1.3 . The 
visual branch architecture which follows multi-branch architecture is 
used to learn characteristics from raw data via targeting a specific goal 
making it effective on detecting hateful memes. The idea of using the 
multi branch architecture is the presence of hundreds of layers making 
the training much easier. 
3.1.1. Computationally efficient multi-branch feature learning 
In recent years, CNNs have become much deeper and deeper as 
multiple layers are better at generalizing. Inception architecture is a 
deep network architecture with the property of divide-transform-merge 
strategy proved to give good accuracy against previous deep networks 
with the limitation of high computational power. In comparison with the 
deeper or wider networks, it has been found that increasing the size of 
the set of transformations with the same architecture is more effective in 
Fig. 4. Proposed Architecture: Multi- Scale Kernel Attentive Visual Module cum Knowledge Distillation Attentional Caption Architecture.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
6
terms of classification and complexity. This paper also presents the 
aggregated transformation as follows: 
∑
D
n = 1
w
n
x
n
→
∑
S
n = 1
Ƭ
n
( x ) (1)  
where, x is the D - channel input vector ( α × β × ϒ ) , 
’ S ’ is the size of the set of transformations Ƭ . 
LHS of Eq. (1) shows the splitting of vector x as low-dimensional 
representation, then transformation is done with the scaling vector, w 
which is finally aggregated as 
∑
D
n = 1
w
n
x
n 
whereas RHS of the equation is 
the aggregated transformation with an arbitrary function as Ƭ
n
( x ) . . 
To further enhance the classification capability of the backbone ar -
chitecture from ( Xie et al., 2017 ), a “ selective kernel ” ( Li et al., 2019 ) 
Fig. 5. Visual Branch Architecture via aggregated residual transformation and attentional module.  
Fig. 6. Selective kernel convolution for adaptive receptive field (divide, merge, and select).  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
7
has been used to exploit the dynamic selection of multi-size convolution 
kernels. 
3.1.2. Selective Kernel Convolution for Adaptive Receptive Field 
A computationally lightweight selective kernel network ( Fig. 6 ) was 
introduced with an adaptively adjustable property of receptive field size, 
making it more effective and efficient for producing the features in 
image classification. Additionally, it includes the triplet operations: 
divide, merge, and select.  
• Divide: The divide procedure produces numerous pathways with 
varied kernel sizes that match different RF sizes of neurons. In this 
phase, two transformations Ƒ ’ : Х →
˜
U ε ℜ
D ’ and 
Ƒ ": Х → Û ε ℜ
D ’ 
with 
variation in the kernel sizes as 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 respectively, are 
conducted on the feature map Ƒ ε ℜ
D 
with dimensions D as α × β ×
ϒ . Both transformations are composed of depth-wise convolutions, 
Batch Normalization (BN), and ReLU function in series. The combi -
nation of all transformations splits the input feature map X into M (M 
= 2).  
• Merge: The Merge operation embeds the global information from the 
two branches (M) via an element-wise summation by the Global 
Average Pool (GAP), generating the vector ’ s ’ as channel-wise sta -
tistics of 1 × 1 dimension, then adds a fully linked layer to mix and 
aggregate the information from two paths Ƒ = Ƒ ’ + Ƒ ’’ to create an 
extensive and global representation of selection weights. 
Further, in this operation, a compact feature descriptor ’ z ’ ( Eq. (2) ) 
is designed to facilitate precise selection guidance through the use of a 
single and fully connected layer. 
z = ReLU ( BN ( Ws )) (2)  
where, W ∈ R
d × 1
; d is the combination of α and β , . 
BN is Batch Normalization, 
‘s ’ is the channel wise statistics of 1 × 1 dimension. 
Select: The select procedure aggregates the feature maps from 
various kernel sizes, i.e., 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 , in accordance with the se -
lection weights A and B to generate the feature maps V1 and V2, 
respectively. Then select V = A ⊗ Ƒ ’ + B ⊗ Ƒ
″
. 
The output feature map V is fed into the multi-directional visual 
attention module for capturing the cross-dimension between spatial and 
channel dimensions of the input. The description of the visual attention 
module is given in section 3.1.3 . 
3.1.3. Multi-directional visual attention 
The attention mechanism in deep neural networks includes either 
channel or spatial or both attentions. Contrary to spatial attention, 
which weighs each pixel in a single feature map, channel attention 
essentially weighs each feature map or channel in the tensor. The pro -
posed attention mechanism is a three-branch multi-directional visual 
attention ( Fig. 7 ) involves both attention (channel + spatial). When 
computing attention on a single pixel channel, there is no dependency 
between channel dimension and spatial dimension, which could result in 
a significant loss of spatial information, this module is used to collect 
cross-dimension dependencies via multi-branch to solve the information 
loss problem. The cross-dimensional dependencies are introduced by 
independently capturing the dependencies between the input tensor ’ s 
(C, H), (C, W), and (H, W) dimensions. The detailed description is as 
follows: 
Each of the three branches of the three-branch multi-directional vi -
sual architecture ( Fig. 7 ) is in charge of calculating and applying the 
attention weights across two of the three dimensions of the input tensor. 
The bottom branch computes fundamental spatial attention, whereas 
the top two branches calculate channel attention weights against each of 
the two spatial dimensions. The input tensor is rotated in the top two 
branches to change its dimensions, and then the Zeroth Pool (Z-Pool) 
operator is used to reduce the zeroth dimension to two by concatenating 
its average-pooled and maximum-pooled features across that dimension. 
After going through a single spatial convolution layer and sigmoid 
activation, the output of this tensor is then relayed, further reducing the 
zeroth dimension to one. After element-wise multiplying the final result 
with the permuted input, the output is then rotated to its original di -
mensions (the same as that of the input). After completing this for each 
of the three branches, the output is formed by averaging the three 
resulting tensors. 
The further sub-section describes the textual branch via knowledge 
Fig. 7. Multi-directional visual attention module ( Misra et al., 2021 ).  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
8
distillation-based attentional tokenization architecture. 
3.2. Knowledge Distillation Based Attentional Caption (KDAC) module 
This module describes the textual branch that consists of a knowl -
edge distillation base during the pre-training phase which is an 
approximated version of BERT, i.e., DistilBERT ( Sanh et al., 2019 ). It is a 
smaller network used to approximate the whole output distributions of a 
big neural network once it has been trained. The advantage of using 
DistilBERT is that it tries to maintain as much performance as feasible 
while optimizing the training by scaling back BERT and speeding it up. 
Another advantage of using DistilBERT, in particular, is that it is 40% 
smaller, 60% faster, and 97% functionally equivalent to the original 
BERT-base model. As inputs, NLP models usually require numeric vec -
tors, which frequently require transforming attributes like words into 
numbers. The BERT algorithm, which Google released in 2019, is a 
member of the class of NLP-based language models referred to as 
transformers and has tokenizers 
that convert sentences into numeric representations. It has been pre- 
trained on big text datasets, making it superior to the earlier word 
embedding methods like TF-IDF, Word2Vec, Glove, etc. As a result, the 
word embedding produced by DistilBERT is superior. The attention 
mechanism is used by the model to produce word embedding. It so 
collects connections for each word based on the terms on both sides of 
the sentence. Positionally encoded-word embedding keeps track of the 
sequence and arrangement of each word in the sentence. It produces 
high-quality contextualized or context-aware word embedding by 
passing through each encoder layer. In this experiment, the DistilBERT- 
cased model is employed (see Fig. 8 ) with 12 attention heads, 768 
hidden layers, and six transformer layers for pre-processing. After input 
had been tokenized, the texts were padded, the tokens were converted 
into input ids, and then the sequence of vectors was fed into the Dis -
tilBERT model. For the given caption, C
j 
with n words can be denoted as 
C
j 
= {w
j1
.w
j2
.w
j3
, … … … .,w
jn
} . Each word w
jk 
is embedded in a 
vector representation. v
j
∈ R
d 
is the d-dimension vector for K
th 
word. 
The final tokenization is denoted as V 
j 
¼ {v
j1
, v
j2
, v
j3
, … … … , v
jn
}. 
The output is generated as a set of 16 features from the text module. 
3.3. Feature fusion 
Social media posts that convey a user ’ s opinion are examples of 
multi-modal data. We have carried out a cross-model feature-level 
fusion for the detection of hate content. In multi-modal hate speech 
detection, by effectively creating the link across modalities, the right 
meanings of the memes must be guaranteed. Early fusion has produced 
impressive outcomes in a number of investigations, while late fusion has 
produced studies with good performance. The algorithm for the pro -
posed work is given in Table 1 . 
In the proposed study, the main component of the suggested 
architecture is feature fusion, the combining of data from many layers. 
Basic techniques like summation or concatenation are frequently used to 
achieve this. Following feature fusion, the vectors are transferred to a 
softmax (normalized exponential function) layer for hate identification. 
4. Experimental setup 
We conduct experiments on three hate image datasets for classifi -
cation. We evaluate a pre-trained DistilBERT model and the SKResNext 
model in a combined way. We have included the results for fusion 
methods where 16 features from the image module and 16 features from 
the text module are concatenated to a total of 32 features. Then, 32 
features are passed to a fully connected layer resulting in the binary 
classification as hate or non-hate. This section provides brief dataset 
descriptions on which the experimentation is being done, various clas -
sification metrics used for the evaluation of results, hardware re -
quirements, pre-processing, and hyperparameter specifications. 
4.1. Datasets 
We have done our experimentation on three publicly available 
datasets specifically related to hate or offensive content. The first issue 
we found in these datasets is that in most images, the textual part and the 
visual information both imply different things. The second issue is 
related to the variation in the channel size of images. 
4.1.1. Multimodal memes dataset (MultiOFF) 
A collection of memes from multiple social platforms makes up the 
multimodal memes dataset (MultiOFF). The 2016 U.S. Presidential 
Election Event dataset was produced utilizing 743 memes that were 
built from a collection of manually annotated picture URLs and text that 
was present in the images. All the unrelated features, such as likes, 
upvotes, timestamps, etc., have already been removed at the time of 
dataset preparation. Furthermore, the dataset is then separated into 
three files: Training file, Testing File, and Validation File, respectively 
containing 445, 149, and 149 memes. 
4.1.2. Hateful memes dataset 
Dataset released by Facebook AI to identify the multimodal hate 
content over internet memes. A collection of about 10000 PNG images, 
further separated into training and testing files. The dataset is reviewed 
by three annotators classified as binary labels. 
4.1.3. MMHS150K dataset 
MMHS150K dataset contains approximately 1,50,000 tweets 
collected from Twitter and annotated using the Amazon Turk crowd -
sourcing platform divided into six labels: No attacks, sexist, racist, 
religion-based, homophobic, or attacks to other communities. 
Fig. 8. Knowledge distillation based attentional caption (KDAC) architecture for caption branch: Attentional tokenization architecture.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
9
4.2. Classification metrics 
Six distinct performance metrics, including accuracy, precision, 
recall, F1-Score, area under the curve (AUC), and Mathews Correlation 
Coefficient (MCC), were used to assess the two-class classification 
model. Table 2 shows the general formulas for the above-mentioned 
performance metrics, along with their ranges. Before going deep into 
the description of the six-performance metrics, a few significant terms 
associated with the performance are given: 
True Positive (TP): It is described as a situation where the values for 
the predicted and actual outcomes are both positive. 
True Negative (TN): It is described as a situation where the values 
for the predicted and actual outcomes are both negative. 
False Positive (FP): A situation in which the predicted value is 
positive but the actual value is negative. 
False Negative (FN): A situation in which the predicted value is 
negative but the actual value is positive. 
Based on the above definitions of the terms, following is the expla -
nation for the above mentioned classification metrics:  
• Accuracy: The number of accurate (TP + TN) predictions divided by 
the total number of predictions (TP + TN + FP + FN) is used to 
measure the model ’ s accuracy.  
• Precision: It is a metric used to assess a model ’ s ability to accurately 
identify the positive class; it is calculated as the ratio of true positives 
to both true and false positives.  
• Recall: Recall estimates how effectively the model separates the true 
positives and false negatives from all of the positive observations in 
the dataset.  
• The definition of F-Measure or F1-score is the harmonic mean of 
recall and precision.  
• AUC : As a measure of the model ’ s performance over all potential 
classification thresholds, AUC is the measurement of the complete 
two-dimensional area under the curve.  
• Mathews Correaltion Coefficient (MCC): The correlation between 
the observed and anticipated classes is measured by the Mathews 
Correaltion Coefficient (MCC). MCC with a value of ’ 1 ’ denotes 
positive correlation, whereas MCC with a value of ’ -1 ’ denotes 
negative correlation. 
4.3. Hardware 
We have conducted the proposed experiment on two NVIDIA Titan 
RTX 24 GB GPUs in parallel and the system memory used is 128 GB. 
4.4. Pre-processing 
For the Pre-Processing of images, the images of size (3 × 256 × 256 )
pixel values normalized to [ 0 , 1 ] . Four-channel images with dimensions 
[ x , y , z , w ] are taken into consideration only after changing the dimension 
to randomly selected three channels such as [ x , y , z ] , [ x , y , w ] , [ y , z , w ] , [ x , z ,
w ] . For the pre-processing of text, an inbuilt DistilBERT preprocessing 
layer is utilized that tokenizes and packs inputs. Table 3 shows the 
overall size of the datasets and the split ratio as approximately 80 : 10 :
10 for training, testing and validation respectively. 
4.5. Hyper parameter specification 
The hyper parameter settings for the experiments are done on the 
datasets are shown in Table 4 . The hyper parameters used are number of 
epoch, batch-sizes, optimizers, learning rate and decay rate. 
5. Results and discussion 
This section shows the classification performance of our proposed 
architecture in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, area under 
curve (AUC), and Mathews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) for each of the 
datasets. The performance metrics signifies that the proposed architec -
ture shows the tremendous improvements in terms of accuracy and AUC 
with a value of 0.8078 and 0.7665 respectively in MMHS150K and an 
Table 1 
Algorithm for the proposed work. 
Table 2 
General Formulas for Classification Metrics used to Evaluate the Performance.  
Metrics Formula Range 
Accuracy TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN 
[ 0 , 1 ]
Precision TP
TP + FP 
[ 0 , 1 ]
Recall TP
TP + FN 
[ 0 , 1 ]
F1-Score ( 2 × Recall × Precision )
Recall + Precision 
[ 0 , 1 ]
AUC – [ 0 , 1 ]
MCC TP × TN   FP × FN
√ ( TP + FP )( TP + FN )( TN + FP )( TN + FN )
[   1 , + 1 ]
Table 3 
Dataset Size and Split Ratio (Training set: Validation set: Testing set).  
Dataset Size Training set Validation set Testing set 
MultiOff 737 500 117 120 
Hateful Memes 8496 6800 800 896 
MMHS150K 140000 100000 20000 20000  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
10
accuracy, precision, AUC with 0.7607, 0.8333, 0.8261 respectively in 
hateful memes. For MultiOff dataset, accuracy and AUC have shown a 
significant improvement with scores 0.6250 and 0.6557 respectively. 
Precision, Recall and F1-scores with values 0.6700, 0.6900, and 0.6799 
have surpassed the benchmark results for MultiOff dataset. We can 
visualize the classification results of all three datasets in Fig. 9 . 
5.1. MSKAV spatio-region focus 
Due to the widespread usage of social media and digital platforms, 
consumers are now able to express their opinions through a variety of 
mediums. Memes are a very common way of sharing views now a day. As 
part of images and captions in memes, both contain a significant amount 
of information that can ’ t be ignored. The spatial region represents the 
informative section of the image. Thus, it locates the relevant visual 
parts according to the visual attended features Table 5 represents the 
visualization of activation mapping by attention method, i.e., LayerCAM 
( Jiang et al., 2021 ), to locate the fine-grained localization of objects. 
The observations from the MSKAV Spatio region focus in images are 
as follows:  
• Provides better object localization by focusing on the specific spatial 
region.  
• The activation map by LayerCAM determines the impact of each 
region on the output of a model. 
5.2. Baseline comparison 
In this section, we compare our results on MultiOff ( Suryawanshi 
et al., 2020b ), Hateful memes ( Kiela et al., 2021 ), and MMHS150K 
( Gomez et al., 2020 ) with their respective SOTA methods, as shown in 
Table 6 . Notably, there are very few implemented works on multi-modal 
hate content detection. The approaches compared in this section in -
cludes these few contributions (( Suryawanshi et al., 2020b ), ( Lee et al., 
2021 ), ( Kiela et al., 2021 ), ( Lee et al., 2021 ), ( Bhat et al., 2022 ), ( Gomez 
et al., 2020 )). 
The comparison of our proposed model with the given methods 
shows that learning and extracting features via multi-scale and multi- 
directional visual and caption branches improves the accuracy and 
AUC approximately by 15% and 0.64%, respectively, in the Hateful 
Memes dataset by 18% and 4% respectively in MMHS150K dataset. 
5.3. Ablation study 
This section conducts ablation experiments to examine the useful -
ness of our proposed architecture. Numerous ablation studies are per -
formed on MultiOff, Hateful memes, and MMHS150K datasets. Based on 
the proposed architecture, we have generated three cases for the con -
duction of ablation study. The first case considers only the KDAC branch 
denoted as "KDAC (Text Branch Only)." The second case eliminates the 
visual attention module from MSKAV branch, denoted as "MSKAV w/o 
Attention." The last case, denoted as "MSKAV with Attention." The 
outcomes of these ablation trials are denoted in Table 7 . 
The ablation study leads to the observations with the following 
conclusions:  
1. The proposed architecture, which is a dual-branch architecture, 
yields the best results on all three datasets.  
2. The removal of any of the branches results in inferior prediction 
results.  
3. The removal of an attentional layer from MSKAV is also producing 
low prediction results. 
From the above observations, it can be concluded that the proposed 
Table 4 
Hyper parameter Specifications in terms of Number of Epochs, Batch-Size, 
Optimizer, Learning Rate, Linear Decay.  
Datasets Number of 
Epochs 
Batch- 
Size 
Optimizer Learning 
Rate 
Linear 
Decay 
MultiOff 40 4 Adam 0.0001 10% 
Hateful 
Memes 
20 16 Adam 0.001 20% 
MMHS150K 10 32 SGD 0.001 50%  
Fig. 9. Classification Results in terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score, AUC, and MCC.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
11
Table 5 
MSKAV Spatio-Region of Importance showing the Localization via LayerCAM.  
Datasets Memes Caption Region of focus for MSKAV branch 
MuliOff 
 I ’ m so evil 
Even Satan is voting republic 
Has a lot of money 
Knows if Bernie wins he has to pay more taxes that will help those less 
fortunate 
Still supports Bernie 
I hope the Trump foundation hasn ’ t broken any laws 
Personally signs every check 
Hateful 
Memes 
You can ’ t be racist if there is no other race 
To see better, 
Asians sometimes switch to fullscreen view 
How many fucking accounts 
Do you assholes have? 
MMHS150K 
 I ’ ll get you, and it ’ ll look like a bloody accident 
Everybody knows you never go full retard 
( continued on next page ) 
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
12
architecture is essential and contributes to the overall performance in 
detecting hate content in memes. 
5.4. Generalization study 
Despite the outstanding performance on multimodal hate content 
datasets, most recently developed methods mainly rely on in-depth 
design analysis within the confines of the dataset, neglecting the 
generalization ability that is necessary when techniques must examine 
examples from different domains or datasets. Consequently, in order to 
demonstrate the resilience of the model, this section presents a cross- 
dataset analysis rather than evaluating the quality of the suggested ar -
chitecture solely on one dataset. As the model performance is evaluated 
on three publicly available datasets (MultiOff, Hateful memes, and 
MMHS150K), therefore, the proposed model is trained on the combi -
nation of two datasets and tested on the third dataset to show the 
generalizability of the architecture ( Table 8 ). 
The graphs represent the accuracy ( Fig. 10 ) and AUC ( Fig. 11 ) 
comparisons for the same and cross-dataset evaluation. 
From the above-presented analysis, we can conclude that there is a 
slight degradation in the performance but not reduced too much when 
taken as a whole, which shows strong generalization in terms of the 
reliability and robustness of the proposed model. 
Table 5 ( continued ) 
Datasets Memes Caption Region of focus for MSKAV branch 
You ’ re a slut pig 
Table 6 
Comparison Table in terms of performance metrics on three benchmark datasets.  
Datasets Methods Performance Metrics 
Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score AUC 
MultiOff Suryawanshi et al. (2020b) – 0.4000 0.6700 0.5000 – 
Lee et al. (2021) – 0.6450 0.6510 0.6460 – 
Proposed – 0.6700 0.6900 0.6799 – 
Hateful Memes Kiela et al. (2021) 0.6947 – – – 0.7544 
Lee et al. (2021) 0.7580 – – – 0.8280 
Bhat et al. (2022) 0.7108 0.7000 – 0.6900 0.7141 
Proposed 0.8750 0.8333 - 0.6950 0.8383 
MMHS150K Gomez et al. (2020) 0.6850 – – 0.7040 0.7340 
Proposed 0.8078 – – 0.7049 0.7665  
Table 7 
Ablation Trials consider Caption Branch Only, Visual Branch w/o attention, and Visual Branch with Attention.  
Methods Datasets 
MultiOff Hateful Memes MMHS150K 
Accuracy AUC Accuracy AUC Accuracy AUC 
KDAC (Text Branch Only) 0.5667 0.3937 0.6585 0.5302 0.7437 0.4909 
MSKAV w/o Attention 0.5333 0.5502 0.3750 0.4333 0.7500 0.3846 
MSKAV with Attention 0.6117 0.6263 0.7607 0.8281 0.8025 0.6958 
Proposed 0.6250 0.6557 0.8750 0.8363 0.8078 0.7665  
Table 8 
Depicts the generalization study when the combination of two datasets is used for training, and the third is used for testing.  
Train Dataset Test Dataset ACC P R F1 AUC MCC 
MultiOff + MMHS150K Hateful Memes 0.8045 0.7993 0.5711 0.6661 0.7789 0.4088 
MultiOff + Hateful Memes MMHS150K 0.7238 0.6123 0.6793 0.6440 0.6994 0.3558 
MMHS150K + Hateful Memes MultiOff 0.5997 0.6482 0.6384 0.6432 0.6189 0.1964  
Fig. 10. Accuracy Comparison for Same and Cross-dataset Evaluation.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
13
6. Discussion 
The proposed architecture intends to classify multimodal data into 
two classes: Hate and No-Hate. Although there exist many forms of hate 
but two major categories of hate can be classified as explicit and. 
implicit hate. Accurate detection and classification of online hate is a 
difficult task. Implicit hate identification is indeed a challenging task as 
such content tends to have unusual syntax, polysemic words, and fewer 
markers of prejudice (slurs). The words as vectors and syntax repre -
sentations as co-occurrence information can be combined to detect im -
plicit hate content online. The other way for implicit hate identification 
in memes is to find the stronger correlation of visual features with 
deeper semantic contextualization of text through the inclusion of 
multimodal data. Also, to work on various forms of hate speech, one 
must possess a strong definition of hate speech, as there are many def -
initions of hate speech available. The presence of insulting terms in a 
text might not convey hate speech, according to some researchers, while 
it can be true for others. Afterward, it is very important to identify the 
right approach towards effective text mining, information retrieval, 
better feature exploration and feature selection, and applying non-linear 
models or weakly supervised learning approaches. Moreover, due to the 
inherent complexity of hate content detection, it becomes essential to 
differentiate among various forms of hate as it might be offensive for 
many people, and others can consider it as hate. The majority of the 
challenge is related to the quality of publicly available datasets. Thus far, 
the available multimodal datasets are not intended to perform hierar -
chical multi-label classification. The proposed model can follow two 
approaches on hierarchical multi-label datasets: a) training the model to 
initially predict all the irrelevant tweets, which learns to classify them to 
all the relevant target entities simultaneously, and b) training ’ n ’ one vs. 
all binary classifier approach for each of the topics to encode the inter- 
label dependencies among co-occurring labels. 
7. Conclusion and further directions 
This study introduces a novel dual-branch network composed of 
knowledge distillation attention for extracting the essential information 
from the caption modality and multi-kernel attention for collecting 
pertinent information from the images. Extensive testing on three pub -
licly accessible datasets showed that the suggested architecture out -
performed baseline models, claiming better results in terms of accuracy 
and AUC scores. We also conducted numerous ablation trials on the 
datasets to conclude that the proposed architecture is contributing to the 
performance of hate content identification in memes. Even though 
encouraging results have been attained, there are still lots of 
opportunities for additional research. Adversarial learning in the multi- 
modal feature fusion module, the development of more effective feature 
fusion techniques, the exploration of a wider variety of multimedia data, 
such as video and audio, and an investigation into the sarcasm compo -
nent of hate content are possible future avenues. Moreover, multimodal 
datasets can be created to perform multi-label hierarchical classifica -
tion. Identifying implicit hate is particularly a challenging task as 
explicit text markers and demographic visual cues are often twisted and 
missing. The analysis and detection of implicit harm can be seen as a 
future task. Additionally, metaheuristic approaches, such as ALO and 
FMO, the parameter optimization strategy, may also be used in the 
future to address the problem of detecting hate content. 
Ethical approval 
There are no studies by any of the authors in this article that used 
humans or animals as subjects. 
Informed consent 
Informed consent was not required as no humans or animals were 
involved. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Anusha Chhabra: Software, Validation, Investigation, Data cura -
tion, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Conceptualization, Meth -
odology. Dinesh Kumar Vishwakarma: Formal analysis, Resources, 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Fund -
ing acquisition. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgment 
There was no specific grant from a government agency, a business, or 
a nonprofit group for this research. 
Fig. 11. AUC Comparison for Same and Cross-dataset Evaluation.  
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
14
References 
Aka Uymaz, H., Kumova Metin, S., 2022. Vector based sentiment and emotion analysis 
from text: a survey. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 113 (May), 104922 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.engappai.2022.104922 . 
Ali, A.M., Ghaleb, F.A., Al-Rimy, B.A.S., Alsolami, F.J., Khan, A.I., 2022a. Deep ensemble 
fake news detection model using sequential deep learning technique. Sensors 22 
(18). https://doi.org/10.3390/s22186970 . 
Ali, R., Farooq, U., Arshad, U., Shahzad, W., Omer, M., 2022b. Computer Speech & 
Language Hate speech detection on Twitter using transfer learning. Comput. Speech 
Lang 74 (February), 101365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2022.101365 . 
Ali, A.M., Ghaleb, F.A., Mohammed, M.S., Alsolami, F.J., Khan, A.I., 2023. Web- 
informed-augmented fake news detection model using stacked layers of 
convolutional neural network and deep autoencoder. Mathematics 11 (9). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/math11091992 . 
Arentz, W.A., Olstad, B., 2004. Classifying offensive sites based on image content. 
Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 94 (1 – 3), 295 – 310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cviu.2003.10.007 . 
Aroyehun, S.T., Gelbukh, A., 2018. Aggression detection in social media: using deep 
neural networks, data augmentation, and pseudo labeling. In: COLING 2018 - 1st 
Work. Trolling, Aggress. Cyberbullying, TRAC 2018 - Proc. Work., pp. 90 – 97 . 
Arroyo-Fern ´andez, I., Forest, D., Torres-Moreno, J.M., Carrasco-Ruiz, M., Legeleux, T., 
Joannette, K., 2018. Cyberbullying detection task: the EBSI-LIA-UNAM system (ELU) 
at COLING ’ 18 TRAC-1. COLING 2018 - 1st Work. Trolling, Aggress. Cyberbullying, 
TRAC 2018 - Proc. Work. 140 – 149 . 
Bajaj, A., Vishwakarma, D.K., 2023. A State-Of-The-Art Review on Adversarial Machine 
Learning in Image Classification. Springer US, 0123456789 . 
Baruah, A., Barbhuiya, F.A., Dey, K., 2019. ABARUAH at SemEval-2019 task 5: Bi- 
directional LSTM for hate speech detection. In: NAACL HLT 2019 - Int. Work. 
Semant. Eval. SemEval 2019, Proc. 13th Work., pp. 371 – 376. https://doi.org/ 
10.18653/v1/s19-2065 , 2017.  
Bhat, A., Varshney, V., Bajlotra, V., Gupta, V., 2022. Detection of hatefulness in Memes 
using unimodal and multimodal techniques. In: Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS 
2022 ) . Iciccs, pp. 65 – 73 . 
Chauhan, D.S., Singh, G.V., Arora, A., Ekbal, A., Bhattacharyya, P., 2022. An emoji- 
aware multitask framework for multimodal sarcasm detection. Knowl. Base Syst. 
257, 109924 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.109924 . 
Chhabra, A., Kumar, D., 2023. A Truncated SVD Framework for Online Hate Speech 
Detection on the ETHOS Dataset, pp. 1 – 4 . 
Chhabra, A., Vishwakarma, D.K., 2022. Fuzzy and Machine Learning Classifiers for Hate 
Content Detection : A Comparative Analysis, pp. 22 – 25 . 
Chhabra, A., Vishwakarma, D.K., 2023. A literature survey on multimodal and 
multilingual automatic hate speech identification. Multimed. Syst., 0123456789 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00530-023-01051-8 . 
Davidson, T., Warmsley, D., Macy, M., Weber, I., 2017. Automated hate speech detection 
and the problem of offensive language. In: Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Web Soc. Media, 
ICWSM 2017, pp. 512 – 515 . 
De La Vega, L.G.M., Ng, V., 2019. Determining trolling in textual comments. Lr. 2018 - 
11th Int. Conf. Lang. Resour. Eval. 3701 – 3706 . 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. BERT: pre-training of deep 
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: NAACL HLT 2019 - 2019 
Conf. North Am. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguist. Hum. Lang. Technol. - Proc. Conf. , 
vol. 1. Mlm, pp. 4171 – 4186 . 
Djuric, N., Zhou, J., Morris, R., Grbovic, M., Radosavljevic, V., Bhamidipati, N., 2015. 
Hate speech detection with comment embeddings. In: WWW 2015 Companion - 
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 29 – 30. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2740908.2742760 . 
Fortuna, P., Soler-Company, J., Wanner, L., 2021. How well do hate speech, toxicity, 
abusive and offensive language classification models generalize across datasets? Inf. 
Process. Manag. 
French, J.H., 2017. Image based memes as sentiment predictors. In: International 
Conference on Information Society (I-Society 2017 ) , pp. 80 – 85 . 
Gandhi, S., et al., 2020. Scalable detection of offensive and non-compliant content/logo 
in product images. In: Proc. - 2020 IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vision, WACV 
2020, pp. 2236 – 2245. https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV45572.2020.9093454 . 
Gomez, R., Gibert, J., Gomez, L., Karatzas, D., 2020. Exploring hate speech detection in 
multimodal publications. In: Proc. - 2020 IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vision, 
WACV 2020, pp. 1459 – 1467. https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV45572.2020.9093414 . 
He, S., Zheng, X., Wang, J., Chang, Z., Luo, Y., Zeng, D., 2016. Meme extraction and 
tracing in crisis events. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informatics Cybersecurity Big 
Data, ISI 2016, pp. 61 – 66. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2016.7745444 . 
Hu, W., Wu, O., Chen, Z., Fu, Z., Maybank, S., 2007. Recognition of pornographic Web 
pages by classifying texts and images. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 29 (6), 
1019 – 1034. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1133 . 
Huang, F., Zhang, X., Zhao, Z., Xu, J., Li, Z., 2019. Image – text sentiment analysis via 
deep multimodal attentive fusion. Knowl. Base Syst. 167, 26 – 37. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.knosys.2019.01.019 . 
Jiang, P.T., Bin Zhang, C., Hou, Q., Cheng, M.M., Wei, Y., 2021. LayerCAM: exploring 
hierarchical class activation maps for localization. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 30 
(June), 5875 – 5888. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2021.3089943 . 
Kakumanu, P., Makrogiannis, S., Bourbakis, N., 2007. A survey of skin-color modeling 
and detection methods. Pattern Recogn. 40 (3), 1106 – 1122. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.patcog.2006.06.010 . 
Kiela, D., et al., 2021. The hateful memes challenge: detecting hate speech in multimodal 
memes. arXiv:2005.04790v3 [cs.AI] , pp. 1 – 17[Online]. Available: http://arxiv. 
org/abs/2005.04790 . 
Le-hong, P., 2021. Knowledge-Based Systems Diacritics generation and application in 
hate speech detection on Vietnamese social networks. Knowl. Base Syst. 233, 107504 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107504 . 
Lee, R.K.W., Cao, R., Fan, Z., Jiang, J., Chong, W.H., 2021. Disentangling hate in online 
memes. Associat. Comput. Mach. 1 (1) . 
Li, X., Wang, W., Hu, X., Yang, J., 2019. Selective kernel networks. IEEE Comput. Soc. 
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. 2019-June, 510 – 519. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
CVPR.2019.00060 . 
Liu, Y., et al., 2019. RoBERTa: a robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. ICLR no. 
1, [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692 . 
Lu, J., Batra, D., Parikh, D., Lee1, Stefan, 2019. ViLBERT: Pretraining Task-Agnostic 
Visiolinguistic Representations for Vision-And-Language Tasks . 
Ma, H., Wang, J., Qian, L., Lin, H., 2021. HAN-ReGRU: hierarchical attention network 
with residual gated recurrent unit for emotion recognition in conversation. Neural 
Comput. Appl. 33 (7), 2685 – 2703. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-05063-7 . 
Martín, A., Camacho, D., 2022. Recent advances on effective and efficient deep learning- 
based solutions. Neural Comput. Appl. 34 (13), 10205 – 10210. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00521-022-07344-9 . 
Misra, D., Nalamada, T., Arasanipalai, A.U., Hou, Q., 2021. Rotate to attend: 
convolutional triplet attention module. Proc. - 2021 IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. 
Comput. Vision, WACV 2021 3138 – 3147. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
WACV48630.2021.00318 . 
Niu, A.E.T., Zhu, S., Pang, L., 2016. Sentiment analysis on multi-view social data. Lect. 
Notes Comput. Sci. 9517. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27674-8_2 . 
Pandey, A., Vishwakarma, D.K., 2023. VABDC-Net: a framework for Visual-Caption 
Sentiment Recognition via spatio-depth visual attention and bi-directional caption 
processing. Knowl. Base Syst. 269, 110515 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
knosys.2023.110515 . 
Poria, S., Cambria, E., Gelbukh, A., 2015. Deep convolutional neural network textual 
features and multiple kernel learning for utterance-level multimodal sentiment 
analysis. Conf. Proc. - EMNLP 2015 Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process. 
(September), 2539 – 2544. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d15-1303 . 
Poria, S., Cambria, E., Howard, N., Bin Huang, G., Hussain, A., 2016. Fusing audio, visual 
and textual clues for sentiment analysis from multimodal content. Neurocomputing 
174, 50 – 59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.01.095 . 
Poria, S., Chaturvedi, I., Cambria, E., Hussain, A., 2017. Convolutional MKL based 
multimodal emotion recognition and sentiment analysis. In: 2016 IEEE 16th Int. 
Conf. Data Min., pp. 439 – 448. https://doi.org/10.1109/icdm.2016.0055 . 
Poria, S., Majumder, N., Hazarika, D., Cambria, E., Gelbukh, A., Hussain, A., 2018. 
Multimodal sentiment analysis: addressing key issues and setting up the baselines. 
IEEE Intell. Syst. 33 (6), 17 – 25. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2018.2882362 . 
Rajput, G., Punn, N.S., Sonbhadra, S.K., Agarwal, S., 2021. Hate speech detection using 
static BERT embeddings. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 13147 LNCS (March), 67 – 77. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93620-4_6 . 
Rani, P., Suryawanshi, S., Goswami, K., Chakravarthi, B.R., Fransen, T., McCrae, J.P., 
2020. A comparative study of different state-of-the-art hate speech detection 
methods in {H}indi-{E}nglish code-mixed data. Proc. Second Work. Trolling, 
Aggress. Cyberbullying 42 – 48 no. May .  
Ranjan, P., Raja, B., Priyadharshini, R., Balabantaray, R.C., 2016. A comparative study 
on code-mixed data of Indian social media vs formal text. In: Proc. 2016 2nd Int. 
Conf. Contemp. Comput. Informatics, IC3I 2016, pp. 608 – 611. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/IC3I.2016.7918035 . 
Saidi, F., Trabelsi, Z., Thangaraj, E., 2022. A novel framework for semantic classification 
of cyber terrorist communities on Twitter. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 115 (August), 
105271 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.105271 . 
Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., Wolf, T., 2019. DistilBERT, a Distilled Version of 
BERT: Smaller, Faster, Cheaper and Lighter. neurIPS, pp. 2 – 6 [Online]. Available: htt 
p://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108 . 
Schmidt, A., Wiegand, M., 2017. A survey on hate speech detection using natural 
language processing. In: Soc. 2017 - 5th Int. Work. Nat. Lang. Process. Soc. Media, 
Proc. Work. AFNLP SIG Soc.,, pp. 1 – 10. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-1101 , 
2012.  
Sharma, P., Ding, N., Goodman, S., Soricut, R., 2018. Conceptual captions: a cleaned, 
hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. ACL 2018 - 56th 
Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. Proc. Conf. (Long Pap. 1, 2556 – 2565 . 
Sharma, A., Kabra, A., Jain, M., 2022. Ceasing hate with MoH: hate speech detection in 
Hindi – English code-switched language. Inf. Process. Manag. 59 (1) . 
Shi, X., Liu, X., Xu, C., Huang, Y., Chen, F., Zhu, S., 2022. Cross-lingual offensive speech 
identification with transfer learning for low-resource languages. Comput. Electr. 
Eng. 101 (April), 108005 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108005 . 
Suryawanshi, S., Chakravarthi, B.R., Verma, P., Arcan, M., McCrae, J.P., Buitelaar, P., 
2020a. A dataset for troll classification of Tamil memes. Proc. WILDRE5 – 5th Work. 
Indian Lang. Data Resour. Eval. 1 (May), 7 – 13 [Online]. Available: https://www. 
aclweb.org/anthology/2020.wildre-1.2 . 
Suryawanshi, S., Chakravarthi, B.R., Arcan, M., Buitelaar, P., 2020b. Multimodal meme 
dataset (MultiOFF) for identifying offensive content in image and text. In: Proc. 
Second Work. Trolling, Aggress. Cyberbullying. Decem, no. May, pp. 32 – 41, 2020, 
[Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.trac-1.6 . 
Tian, C., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Gao, X., 2018. Color pornographic image detection based on 
color-saliency preserved mixture deformable part model. Multimed. Tools Appl. 77 
(6), 6629 – 6645. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-017-4576-2 . 
Warner, W., Hirschberg, J., 2012. Detecting hate speech on the world wide web. In: 
Proceeding LSM ’ 12 Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Language in Social 
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 126 (2023) 106991
15
Media. Lsm, pp. 19 – 26 [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm? 
id = 2390374.2390377 . 
Waseem, Z., Davidson, T., Warmsley, D., Weber, I., 2017. Understanding abuse: a 
typology of abusive language detection subtasks. Proc. First Work. Abus. Lang. 
Online 78 – 84. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-3012 . 
Watanabe, H., Bouazizi, M., Ohtsuki, T., 2018. Hate speech on twitter: a pragmatic 
approach to collect hateful and offensive expressions and perform hate speech 
detection. IEEE Access 6, 13825 – 13835. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2018.2806394 . 
Wullach, T., Adler, A., Minkov, E., 2022. Character-level HyperNetworks for hate speech 
detection. Expert Syst. Appl. 205 (May), 117571 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eswa.2022.117571 . 
Xie, S., Girshick, R., Doll ´ar, P., Tu, Z., He, K., 2017. Aggregated residual transformations 
for deep neural networks. In: Proc. - 30th IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern 
Recognition, CVPR 2017, 2017-Janua, pp. 5987 – 5995. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
CVPR.2017.634 . 
Yadav, A., Kumar Vishwakarma, Dinesh, 2023. MRT-Net: auto-adaptive weighting of 
manipulation residuals and texture clues for face manipulation detection. Expert 
Syst. Appl. 232 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120898 . 
Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov, R., Le, Q.V., 2019. XLNet: 
generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Adv. Neural Inf. 
Process. Syst. 32 (NeurIPS), 1 – 18 . 
Yu, X., Li, Y., Li, X., Wang, L., Wang, K., 2023a. Research on outdoor mobile music 
speaker battery management algorithm based on dynamic redundancy. Technologies 
11 (2), 1 – 11. https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies11020060 . 
Yu, X., Ma, N., Zheng, L., Wang, L., Wang, K., 2023b. Developments and Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence in Music Education. MDPI Technol. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
technologies11020042 
Zampieri, M., et al., 2020. SemEval-2020 task 12: multilingual offensive language 
identification in social media (OffensEval 2020). In: Proc. Int. Work. Semant. Eval. , 
No. OffensEval . 
Zhang, M., et al., 2023a. A review of SOH prediction of Li-ion batteries based on data- 
driven algorithms. Energies 16 (7). https://doi.org/10.3390/en16073167 . 
Zhang, M., et al., 2023b. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: a new chapter in the 
fast and accurate estimation of the state of health for lithium-ion batteries. Energies 
16 (4), 1 – 16. https://doi.org/10.3390/en16041599 . 
A. Chhabra and D.K. Vishwakarma                                                                                                                                                                                                        